Assyrian folk/pop music, also known as Assyrian folk music, Assyrian pop music or Syriac music (Syriac: ܡܘܣܝܩܝ ܣܦܝܢܘܬܐ ܐܬܘܪܝܬܐ/ܣܘܪܝܝܬܐ‎), is the traditional music style of the Assyrians people. Assyrian music includes a broad range of genre, which would encompass, or fuse, western genres such as electronic, Latin, jazz and/or classical music, with a melodic influence of Assyrian folk. Assyrian songs are usually lengthy, tending to be around 5 minutes long on average.
Assyrian folk music claims to be the descendant of the music of their ancient Upper Mesopotamian ancestors that has survived in the liturgical music of the Syriac Churches. Assyrian folk can also be found in traditional Middle Eastern Makams, and it has similarities to other folk music in Western Asia, such as Kurdish, Turkish and Armenian music. Assyrian songs are generally sung in Iraqi Koine, a standard variety. However, older songs mostly had an Urmian dialect and tribal-folk music tend to contain Tyari dialects.
Modern Assyrian pop music is mostly in a minor key, typically in the Phrygian mode, and themes tend to focus on longing, melancholy, strife and love issues. Most recently, Assyrian dance music has a beat or rhythm similar to Jamaican music (see riddim). Solos are common in Assyrian music and they are usually protracted. Instrumentation is mostly arranged with a keyboard and electronic drums, namely in weddings or parties. Although many forms of Assyrian records do use acoustic and orchestral instruments such as strings, pianos, saxophones and violins.
Music is omnipresent in the village scene. A “Musician” is not necessarily a professional; Whoever can sing in any manner is considered a “singer”. Most of the time, music is learned by ear. The villagers lead a hard life, but whenever there is an opportunity, they love to make music or listen to it. Village music may be categorized, basically, into four groups: Local secular music not related to specific occasions; functional music; religious music; music adopted from other areas.
Here are few types of tribal Assyrian Music that has survived to this day, especially in the Assyrian villages and towns of Northern Iraq, southeast Turkey, northwest Iran and northeast Syria:
It was in the Assyrian homeland north of Mosul that people started to write the modern Syriac vernacular more than two hundred years before the earliest British missionaries, although the earliest records of the Syriac language date from 5th century BC Achaemenid Assyria. The earliest dated text is a poem written in 1591. This makes early Neo-Syriac literature a contemporary of Jewish Neo-Aramaic literature from roughly the same region, dating back to the late 16th century.
The Neo-Syriac literature which existed before the arrival of British and American missionaries consisted mainly of poetry. This poetry can be divided into three categories: stanzaic Hymns, dispute poems, and drinking songs. Of these three categories, only the hymns, which in Neo-Syriac are termed duriky; and which can be seen as the equivalent of the Classical Syriac madrase, can usually be traced back to individual authors.
World War I, and the resulting Assyrian Genocide, drove many Assyrians out from the mountainous region of Hakkari (South East Turkey) back into the Assyrian regions of northern Iraq and north east Syria, and World War II brought them in direct contact with the west especially the British army in Iraq, Russians in Urmia and the French in Syria. But the contact with the British caused the most influence on modern Assyrian Music, especially the period after the independence of Iraq in 1932, which brought British oil companies into Iraq and they employed many by now English speaking Assyrians. At this time they came in contact with western Music and Instruments. Assyrian youth started picking up and playing these new instruments after seeing and hearing the British playing. Assyrian youths started to find new bands and to play in parties, picnics and other functions for both Assyrians and others.
In Baghdad, Iraq the earliest known record is by Hanna Patros in 1931 – perhaps two Gramophones (78rpm) with 2 songs on each (church hymns and folk songs). Called “"Karuzuta d-khasha". Hanna Petros (1896–1958), Later became the music director at the conservatory in Baghdad. There were church hymns and folklore songs with a musical company on the records.
Albert Rouel Tamras releases his first records in Baghdad in 1966 on Bashirphone label owned by Jameil Bashir an Assyrian Iraqi oud and Violin Soloist. Singing in the background with Albert are Biba and Sargon Gabriel two Assyrian singers who will later become modern Assyrian singers in the US. Gabriel Asaad (1907–1997) in 1926 wrote and composed his first song "Othroye Ho Mtoth Elfan L-Metba".
From the 1970s and onward, Assyrian music started to incorporate elements from western popular music, such as British and American music. Genres such as soft rock, pop ballads and dance pop became popular from 1980s and onward, although they all still had elements of Assyrian folk. In the 1990s and 2000s, Assyrian artists routinely fused in the Latin genre in a lot of their songs with instruments such as the Flamenco guitar being featured. Rock music never became popular in the Assyrian music scene, although a few Assyrian songs have featured electric guitars. Despite rock's unpopularity, there exists an Assyrian-Armenian metal band called Melechesh, which has extensive Assyrian-Mesopotamian influences both lyrically and instrumentally.
Although Assyrian music generally have a similar chord progression and are usually in the minor key, the genre and instrumentation of the music vastly differ from each other, as seen in these sample examples:
A standard Assyrian folk song from the 1970s.
A jazzy-flavoured ballad from the early 1980s.
An exemplary Assyrian soft rock ballad from the 1980s.
A danceable pop ballad from the 1980s which is set in Dorian ♭2, a commonly used scale in Assyrian music.
A Baroque pop song from the 1980s by Linda George, which fuses pop and classical genres.
A somber threnody or a lament type of music from the 1990s. This melody is commonly used to reminisce the Assyrian homeland and those who perished there.
A love song by Evin Agassi from the late 1990s with a Latin beat.
Assyrian anthems typically have an uplifting, fervent melody with a marching rhythm and are arranged by synthesizers, as heard in this late 1990s patriotic song.
An Assyrian ballad from the late 1990s which is set in a waltz time.
A danceable pop song from the early 2000s which has Assyrian folk arrangement.
A dance ballad from the 2000s which has a beat of Arab pop.
An emblematic Assyrian modern ballad arranged by a keyboard synth, from the late 2000s.
An Assyrian dance-pop song from the 2010s which incorporates an electronic dance rhythm.
A typical, modern, synthesized dance song from 2010s which has Kurdish and Turkish influence.
Some of the notable Assyrian dances include:
