Dark pop, dark-pop, or darkpop is a loosely defined pop music genre that incorporates dark atmospheres and themes.[citation needed]
Early references to "dark pop" appear in the early 1980s, with New York fanzine-turned-rock magazine Trouser Press referring to underground new wave bands such as the Cheepskates and Chris Spedding's the Necessaries as "dark pop" in 1983. Other 1980s and early 1990s new wave, post-punk, and alternative rock bands have been associated with the term, including New Order, Peter Murphy, Duran Duran, The Bevis Frond, and Art Bergmann.
In the 1990s, certain alternative rock groups featured dark pop elements; groups such as the Smashing Pumpkins and Screaming Trees described aspects of their sound as "dark pop", and 1990s Mexican alternative rock band Caifanes were referred to as a "dark-pop band reminiscent of The Cure." By the late 1990s, "dark pop" was used to describe such varied artists as the late alt-country singer Diane Izzo and industrial rock band Orgy. Radiohead described their sixth album, Hail To The Thief, as "dark pop" in 2003. In early press statements, the alternative cartoon group Gorillaz would describe themselves as "dark pop" and "zombie hip hop". In 2007, such disparate alternative rock albums as Danzig's Lost Tracks of Danzig, Interpol's Our Love to Admire, and Idiot Pilot's Wolves contained dark pop. Alternative metal and experimental rock band Deftones have been noted throughout the years for incorporating "dark pop" elements into their music. Deftones' frontman Chino Moreno's band Crosses has also been described as a "dark-pop side project."
Singer Charli XCX has frequently been described as part of the dark pop genre, particularly at the beginning of her career and in reference to her 2013 debut album True Romance. Billboard referred to True Romance as a "collection of darkwave pop gems". The song "You're the One" of that same album was compared to Siouxsie and the Banshees' 1991 song "Kiss Them for Me", and Charli XCX confirmed that she had been influenced by dark pop artists: "At the time, I was listening to a lot of dark pop, so I was inspired by a lot of the deep bass sounds. Sure, Siouxsie is there, too. We just kind of rolled with it." Other songs on the album, specifically "Stay Away" and "Nuclear Seasons" were described by Charli XCX as "dark pop", with Pitchfork noting that "[t]hese lovelorn tracks prettify the scuzzy semi-genre known as witch house with crisp 80s synths and Charli's radio-ready vocals, which manage to sound simultaneously polished and creaky." Charli XCX's 2016 EP Vroom Vroom has also been described as "dark pop."
Other pop musicians such as Lady Gaga have been referred to as "dark-pop", with Lady Gaga's song "Bad Romance" being referred to as a "dark-pop banger" by Forbes. In recent years, the term has also been used by bands such as The Neighbourhood and the Bloom Twins, who have referred to their music genres as dark pop in 2013 and 2014 respectively. In 2015, 2016, and 2017, artists such as UNKLE, Lana Del Rey, Halsey, electronic duo XYLO, electronic pop band Muna, singer-songwriter Vérité, singer-songwriter Banks, Cold Cave, singer Billie Eilish, singer Dua Lipa, Scottish-born singer Kloe, the Brooklyn-based Mothica, the Swedish duo Snow Culture, Swedish artist Skott, So Below, London-based singer Malory, and the band Yonaka, among others, have all been referred to as "dark pop".
