Electronicore (also known as synthcore or trancecore) describes a stylistic fusion of metalcore with elements of various electronic music genres, such as trance, electronica, and dubstep. The term electronicore is a portmanteau of electronic and metalcore. Notable artists of this genre have originated from the United Kingdom, the United States, Australia, Canada, France, Hong Kong and Japan.
Sumerian Records noted in the late 2000s that "there has been a surplus of electronica/hardcore music as of late." Attack Attack! is often recognized as the primary American contributor of the style. I See Stars debut album, 3-D, was popular "amongst the synthcore scene." Enter Shikari is an electronicore band that began in 1999, adding their last member and transforming to "Enter Shikari" from "Hybryd" in early 2003, in St Albans, England. The group has received international radio airplay and a substantial number of musical awards, from Kerrang!, NME, Rock Sound Magazine and BT Digital Awards. They express a relationship with electronic music genres such as trance and have been referred to as the "kings of trancecore." Their second album, titled Common Dreads, was released in June 2009 and debuted on the UK Albums Chart at 16. We Butter The Bread With Butter is another electronicore band, from Lübben (Spreewald), Germany, that has released four albums and one EP since 2008.
The compilation Punk Goes Pop 4, one of many albums in the Punk Goes... series, "features some of the hottest pop songs in music today being performed by various metalcore, post-hardcore and electronicore artists." Altsounds, an independent music journal, noted that there has been a "sudden rise in the amount of bands combining electronic and metal styles of music." The article noted that many of the bands who created cover songs for Punk Goes Pop 4 incorporated characteristics of electronicore, specifically referencing I See Stars and Woe, Is Me.
Electronicore is characterized by typical metalcore instrumentation, breakdowns, and heavy use of sequencers, conventional instrument recorded-note samplers, electronic tone-generating synthesizers, auto-tuned singing, and screamed vocals. The genre often features dynamic transitions from soft electronica ballads to intense metalcore passages. However, the degree to which metalcore characteristics are incorporated may vary. In addition to electronica, the fusion may involve a variety of other electronic music genres, including techno, trance, dubstep, electro, and dance.
