Electronic rock is a broad music genre that combines rock music and electronic music, featuring instruments typically found within both genres. It originates from the late 1960s, when rock bands such as the Doors, Pink Floyd, Yes and the Moody Blues began incorporating the Moog synthesizer into their sound. Sampling and tape manipulation would also become common with the genre. Electronic rock acts usually fuse elements from other music styles, including punk rock, industrial rock, hip hop, techno, and synth-pop, which has helped spur subgenres such as indietronica, dance-punk, and electroclash. Since the late 2000s, electronic rock has become increasingly popular.
Being a fusion genre of rock and electronic, electronic rock features instruments found in both genres, such as synthesizer, mellotron, electric guitar and drums. Some electronic rock artists, however, often eschew guitar, in favor of using technology to emulate a rock sound. Vocals are usually mellow or upbeat. Instrumentals are also common with the genre. Many bands in the genre favor electronic percussion over traditional percussion.
The term "progressive rock" (or "prog rock") was originally deployed in the 1960s for music that would otherwise be described as "electronic rock", but the definition of "prog" later narrowed into a specific set of musical conventions, as opposed to a sensibility involving forward-thinking or experimental approaches. Electronic rock is also associated with industrial rock, synth-pop, dance-punk, indietronica, and new wave, with electroclash, new rave, post-punk revival and post-rock, as well as the aforementioned dance-punk and indietronica, being considered subgenres of it. Sometimes, certain other electronic subgenres are fused with rock, such as trance and techno, leading to the use of the terms trance rock and techno rock, respectively.
Heavy metal, a major subgenre of rock, is sometimes mixed with electronic and its subgenres, coining the terms electronic metal, electronic dance metal, trance metal and techno metal.[text–source integrity?] Additionally, heavy metal subgenre metalcore has been mixed with electronic, hence electronicore. A closely related genre called Nintendocore mixes heavy metal and hardcore punk with chiptune and video game music.[citation needed]
Like heavy metal, punk rock has been mixed with electronic music as well, such as synthpunk and dance-punk.
Electronic rock, synth rock, trance rock, or techno rock
Electronic metal, trance metal, or techno metal
