Emo hip hop (also known as emo rap, emo trap, and sad rap) is a subgenre of hip hop fusing beats common in hip hop music, and more specifically trap music, with lyrical themes, vocals, and musicianship common in emo music, along with elements of other closely associated genres like indie rock and nu metal. Prominent artists of the genre include Lil Peep, XXXTentacion, and nothing,nowhere.
Emo hip hop has been noted to depart from the more traditional tones of mainstream hip hop in favor of more emotional and personal lyrical content. This genre is often characterized by its combination of the typical musical elements often found in conscious hip hop with indie rock instrumentals. Horse Head of the emo hip hop collective Gothboiclique has described the genre as "...sort of nostalgic, but it's new too...no one's really done shit like this. It's like emo rap and melodic trap".
Emo hip hop beats generally incorporate the use of real instrument. Sampling in the genre often utilizes 2000s pop punk and emo songs, a fusion first popularized by MC Lars in 2004. A lot of the sampling is due to the artists who inspired the genre, such as Underoath and Brand New, and is usually accompanied by original instruments.
Despite emo hip hop widely being considered to be a new phenomenon the terms usage and hip hop containing lyrics associated with emo music dates back over a decade with artists like Gym Class Heroes, Hollywood Undead, and Eminem. Along with this rappers such as Tupac, Nelly, Jay-Z, Joe Budden, Kanye West, and The Notorious B.I.G have been occasionally labeled as emo hip hop due to their emotional lyrics as well as minor similarities with the genre despite their music largely predating the movement. The uses of this term beforehand, however, did not refer to this genre, as emo hip hop was used as a general word to describe sad hip hop music.
Kid Cudi is widely credited as one of the biggest influences on emo hip hop by introducing lyrics of depression, loneliness, and anxiety in 2009 with Man on the Moon: The End of Day. Publications such as HotNewHipHop, DJBooth and IBTimes have all noted Cudi's influence on contemporary hip hop, since his breakthrough in 2008. Prior to the album's release, Cudi co-wrote several songs on Kanye West's 808s and Heartbreak, which, along with Drake's So Far Gone, is seen as a seminal influence on the genre.
Drake has also been noted to influence the current form of emo hip hop by using indie rock instruments in his previous ventures..
