Hip house, also known as rap house or house rap, is a musical genre that mixes elements of house music and hip hop. The style rose to prominence during the late 1980s in Chicago and New York. Hip house originated in Chicago and quickly became popular across the U.S. and in the UK, with tracks like "Rok Da House" by English electronic group the Beatmasters featuring British female MCs the Cookie Crew.
Jackstreet Records' 1989 release of Vitamin-C/aka Dj Supa Kush's "The Chicago Way" helped to bring focus to the lyrical prowess of hip house rappers. Minor controversy ensued in 1989 when a U.S. record called "Turn Up the Bass" by Tyree Cooper featuring Kool Rock Steady claimed it was the "first hip house record on vinyl". The Beatmasters disputed this, pointing out that "Rok Da House" had originally been written and pressed to vinyl in 1986. The outfit then released "Who’s in the House?" featuring British emcee Merlin, containing the lines "Beatmasters stand to attention, hip house is your invention" and "Watch out Tyree, we come faster". More claims to the hip-house crown were subsequently laid down in tracks by Fast Eddie, Rob Base and DJ E-Z Rock, Pamp & Da Knox, and Toni Scott.
After successful releases by the Beatmasters, Deskee, Tyree, Doug Lazy and Mr. Lee, hip-house became popular in the acid house warehouse scene and nightclubs. Hip house also garnered substantial chart success. The style complemented sample-based records of the period, produced by artists such as S-Express, Bomb the Bass and M/A/R/R/S.
Hip house's further crossover success would come in the form of two ground breaking records: "I'll House You" by the Jungle Brothers and "It Takes Two" by Rob Base and DJ E-Z Rock. "I'll House You" is generally seen as a collaboration between New York City house-music producer Todd Terry and the Jungle Brothers (an Afrocentric hip-hop group from New York). "It Takes Two" was described by Hip Hop Connection magazine as "...the first palatable form of hip-house for hardcore hip hop fans".
Hip-house tracks featured on popular dance compilations including Telstar's compilation series and was championed by DJs such as To Kool Chris and Chad Jackson.
When R&B was fused with garage house, it created a new genre termed "UK garage". The further fusion of UK garage with British hip hop resulted in what is now known as "grime". A derivate form of grime known as "grindie" adds a flavour of rap rock, drum and bass and alternative dance. The genres speed garage and UK funky are also fusions of British hip hop with some form or aspect of house music.
A modern form of hip house became popular in the mid to late 2000s with many artists enjoying mainstream success worldwide. A fusion of electropop with hip hop (also known as electro hop) proved very popular and dominated the charts in the late 2000s and early 2010s. Such artists include LMFAO, The Black Eyed Peas, Pitbull, Flo Rida, Far East Movement, Hyper Crush, The Streets, Example and Azealia Banks. Dance music DJs/producers also had hits in the hip house genre, which featured vocals from rappers. These include "C'mon (Catch 'em by Surprise)" by Tiësto and Diplo with Busta Rhymes, "Forever" by Wolfgang Gartner and will.i.am, and "Miami 2 Ibiza" by Swedish House Mafia and Tinie Tempah. French artist David Guetta had several hip house hits such as "Memories" with Kid Cudi, "Where Them Girls At" with Flo Rida and Nicki Minaj, "Gettin' Over You" with LMFAO and "Little Bad Girl" with Taio Cruz and Ludacris.
