Melodic metalcore is a subgenre of metalcore with a heavy emphasis on melodic instrumentation, blast beats, metalcore-stylized breakdowns and clean singing. The genre has seen commercial success for employing a "more accessible and commercial style" than typical metalcore. Many notable melodic metalcore bands have been influenced by melodic death metal.
Prominent melodic metalcore bands such as Killswitch Engage have been described as "radio-friendly metalcore."
The style began in the early-2000s tracing its roots to melodic death metal groups such as At the Gates. The Amity Affliction formed in 2003, and is a significant contributor to melodic metalcore. By 2004 the genre saw increasing prominence, with Shadows Fall's The War Within debuting at number 20 on the Billboard album chart. In 2008 the All That Remains' single "Two Weeks" peaked at number 9 at the Mainstream Rock Tracks chart in the U.S., and on the Modern Rock Tracks chart at number 38. In 2007, the song "Nothing Left" by As I Lay Dying was nominated for a Grammy award in the "Best Metal Performance" category. An Ocean Between Us (the album that included "Nothing Left") itself was a commercial success, debuting at number 8 on the Billboard 200. Welsh melodic metalcore band Bullet for My Valentine's third album Fever debuted at number 3 selling more than 71,000 copies in its first week in the U.S. and more than 21,000 copies in the UK during 2010 alone.
Melodic metalcore bands often take influence from the guitar riffs and writing styles of Swedish melodic death metal bands, especially At the Gates, Arch Enemy, In Flames and Soilwork. Practitioners of the genre tend to make use of instrumental melody, and many prominently feature clean singing alongside typical metalcore growls and screams. Melodic metalcore often promotes "very positive lyrical content." The genre can also feature harmonic guitar riffs, tremolo picking, double bass drums and metalcore-stylized breakdowns. Some bands include guitar solos. A few of these groups, like Shadows Fall, have some appreciation for 1980s glam metal.
