Moombahton (/ˈmuːmbətɒn/, MOOM-bə-ton) is a fusion genre of house music and reggaeton that was created by American DJ and producer Dave Nada in Washington, D.C., in 2009. Identifying characteristics of moombahton include a thick and spread-out bass line, dramatic builds, and a two-step pulse with quick drum fills. Occasionally moombahton includes ravey synthesizers and a cappella rap samples. Nada coined the name as a portmanteau of Moombah (a track by Dutch house DJ Chuckie and producer/DJ Silvio Ecomo), and reggaeton (itself a neologism combining reggae with the Spanish suffix -ton, signifying big).
Moombahton was created by Dave Nada in late 2009 while DJing his cousin's high school cut party in Washington, D.C.. He blended the house and club music which he had planned to play with the dancehall and bachata the guests were previously listening to by slowing down Afrojack's remix of Silvio Ecomo and Chuckie's song "Moombah!" from 128 BPM to 108 BPM, to create the basis of the genre. Between late 2009 and early 2010, Nada worked on a five track extended play of moombahton tracks that was released in March 2010, with the support of the DJ Ayres and the DJ Tittsworth at T&A Records.
Though not referred to as moombahton, the concept of combining reggae/dancehall/reggaeton percussion with electronic elements dates back further than Dave Nada. Examples of artists which previously fused Latin and electronic dance music include Nadia Oh, El General, Masters at Work, Munchi, Luny Tunes, Jowell & Randy.
Moombahcore is a subgenre of moombahton with dubstep influences, also incorporating elements of gabber, breakcore, techstep, funk and synth pop.
Moombahcore fused dubstep drums and moombahton tempo (100-115 BPM), also has elements like wobble bass, FM synth, distorted basslines, and complex percussion patterns. Moombahcore tracks often has influences of dutch house, funk, reggae, rap and rock. The theme chiptune and videogames was used in many productions, similarly to glitch hop.
Moombahcore originated in 2009-2010 with productions published in Soundcloud. Dave Nada, Skrillex, Munchi, Diplo, Dillon Francis and Kill The Noise are the main artists who created and contributed to this genre, whom all have attained big popularity in EDM festivals. Moombahcore became very popular in 2011 with the single, Bangarang, produced by American DJ and producer Skrillex with the rapper Sirah. By 2012, songs featuring the moombahcore genre have been produced by artists like Knife Party, Porter Robinson, Savant, Barely Alive, and The Living Tombstone.
Moombahsoul (also called moombahdeep or ambient moombahton) is a subgenre of moombahton, which contains influences with a fusion of deep house and soul, as well as genres such as dutch house, electro house, house, also shares reggaeton, salsa, reggae and latin house, although the style and elements of tropical house.
It has the characteristic of being a genre without having a very notorious climax, similar to deep house. It features percussions and 4/4 ("four-on-the-floor") kicks inherited from house music and with dutch house style and rhythm taken from reggaeton with melodies that can be similar to those of salsa but without being "explosive" due to its deep house resemblance. It can also feature tropical percussions that brings a general tropical vibe inherited from tropical house. Another aspect that Moombahsoul shares with deep house is that it features a soft, sensual, warm yet danceable sound at the same time. Usually it has a tempo that oscillates between 108 and 116 bpm.
