Nardcore is a hardcore punk movement that began in Southern California during the early 1980s, originating in Silver Strand Beach and Port Hueneme. Early bands of the nardcore scene include Agression, Dr. Know, False Confession, Ill Repute, Habeas Corpus, RKL and Scared Straight. The first venues to regularly host punk shows in the Oxnard area were Casa Tropical (a Quonset hut at the Oxnard Airport), Town and Country (Port Hueneme), Skate Palace (Port Hueneme), and Casa de la Raza (Santa Barbara).
The local Skate Scene play heavily in the scene, many people riding in backyard half pipes or breaking into backyards with empty pools to skate. “We were all skaters before we were punkers,” said Brandon Cruz, singer for several Nardcore bands.
There was no real unity or togetherness between the bands, just the geographic proximity and search for venues. Around 1977, the first group in the area was a Moorpark band called The Rotters, emulating the new sounds of English punk rock. After playing a few parties for high school age audiences, Agression latched onto the style. The younger, future members of Dr. Know and Ill Repute were in the audiences saying "Oh, we can do that."
Some unity came from the coverage by a local publication called 60 Miles North, which began in 1983 initially as a xeroxed flyer for an Alley Cats concert in nearby Camarillo. Ill Repute singer John Phaneuf says "Goldenvoice played a big role in getting the Oxnard scene big in L.A."
Much of the early promotion of nardcore was due to Mystic Records, in Hollywood, California, and its founder Doug Moody, and promotion director, Mark Wilkins. Mystic launched many bands onto vinyl which helped them form relationships with the music industry.
By combining the words "Oxnard" and "hardcore", the name is a reference to the Oxnard, California hardcore punk scene. Brandon Cruz credits Dr. Know guitarist Ismael Hernandez as the originator of the term. This suburban community, sixty miles north of Los Angeles, California, was the spawning ground for many hardcore punk bands of the early 1980s and became a hotbed for punk and skate bands. Their collective sound became known as "Nardcore." Nardcore was popularized by the bands themselves, with a little help from Mystic records, Doug Moody and Mystic Promotion Director Mystic Mark Wilkins over a series of Vinyl Releases in the early 1980s.  Nardcore tends to have a lot of the same characteristics as skate punk; however, it has a sound closer to traditional hardcore punk. A congealing of the style was the epinonimous compilation LP release in 1984.
“Punk music was Exploited, Discharge. The bands coming from England, and the bands that copied them were punk bands. The stuff we were producing was an original form of Californian music, thrash, or skateboard punk. It originated here.”
Nardcore had a resurgence in the mid-90's with bands like Burning Dog, Clenched Fist, F.A.Y., No Motiv, and The Missing 23rd. Many of the bands of this era were documented on the compilation LP titled "Localism" which was released on Fred Hammer's It's Alive Records in 1996.
In April 2005 there was a CD Released by Let Them Eat Records entitled Welcome to the Neighborhood. The CD features Nardcore bands such as Dr. Know and Ill Repute, but also featured Ventura County's newer bands such as The Last Priority, and California Redemption.
Ill Repute is among several of the original Nardcore bands that continues to play. Their history covered in the documentary “Clean Cut American Kids: the Story of Ill Repute” The Port Hueneme City Council proclaimed April 7, 2014 as Ill Repute Day in honor of the sustained alliance the band has had with the city.
A multi day festival of Narcore, called Nardfest has been held at the historic Ventura Theatre, inspiring the reunions of other bands across the history.
With veterans of other nardcore bands, Stäläg 13 continues to play into 2018, as does Agression. Rich Kids on LSD (RKL) have reformed as a tribute called Thee RKaLiens. Brandon Cruz has revived Dr. Know under the name KNOW, doing a tour of Europe in 2017 with Stäläg 13.
