Dark wave (also typeset as darkwave) is a subgenre of gothic rock characterized by its implementation of electronic instrumentation, often taking cues from the neighboring synthpop genre. The label began to appear in the late 1970s and early 1980s in German music media. The genre employs introspective, sometimes sorrowful lyrics and atmospheres. In the 1980s, a subculture developed primarily in Europe alongside dark wave music, whose members were called "wavers":60 or "dark wavers".
The term was coined in Germany in the 1980s[contradictory] to describe a dark and melancholy variant of new wave and post-punk music and was first applied[verification needed] to musicians such as Bauhaus, Joy Division,:47 The Cure,:47 Siouxsie and the Banshees,:47 The Chameleons,:47 Cocteau Twins, Depeche Mode, Gary Numan, and Anne Clark.
The movement spread internationally, spawning such developments as French coldwave. Coldwave described groups such as KaS Product, Martin Dupont, Asylum Party, Norma Loy, Clair Obscur, Opera Multi Steel, The Breath of Life, Trisomie 21, Attrition, In The Nursery, and Pink Industry (UK), Clan of Xymox (Netherlands), Mittageisen (Switzerland), Parálisis Permanente and Los Monaguillosh (Spain), Die Form (France), and Psyche (Canada). German dark wave groups of the 1980s were associated with the Neue Deutsche Welle, and included Asmodi Bizarr, II. Invasion, Mask For, Moloko †, Maerchenbraut, Unlimited Systems, and Xmal Deutschland. In the United States, Eleven Pond were the most prominent darkwave act, releasing just one album, Bas Relief, in 1986.
After post-punk evolved into alternative rock in the mid-1980s, and the collapse of new wave in the early 1990s, dark wave was renewed as an underground movement[not in citation given] by German bands such as Girls Under Glass, Deine Lakaien, Love Is Colder Than Death, early Love Like Blood, and Diary of Dreams, as well as Project Pitchfork along with its offshoot Aurora Sutra, and Wolfsheim. The Italians The Frozen Autumn, Kirlian Camera, Ataraxia, and Nadezhda, the South African band The Awakening and the French Corpus Delicti, also practiced the style. All of these bands followed a path based on the new wave and post-punk movements of the 1980s. At the same time, a number of German artists, including Das Ich, Relatives Menschsein and Lacrimosa, developed a more theatrical style, interspersed with German poetic and metaphorical lyrics, called Neue Deutsche Todeskunst (New German Death Art). Other bands such as Silke Bischoff, In My Rosary, and Engelsstaub mingled synthwave or goth rock with elements of the neofolk or neoclassical genres.
In 1993, in the United States, dark wave (as the one-word variant 'darkwave'), along with its ethereal wave and neoclassical dark wave offshoots, became associated with the Projekt Records label, because it was the name of their printed catalog, and was used to market German artists like Project Pitchfork. Projekt features bands such as Lycia, Black Tape for a Blue Girl and Love Spirals Downwards, most of these characterized by female vocals. This style took cues from 1980s 4AD bands such as Cocteau Twins. The label has also had a long association with Attrition, who appeared on the label's earliest compilations. Another American label in this vein was Tess Records, which featured This Ascension and Faith and the Muse. Clan of Xymox, who had returned to their dark wave sound, following almost a decade as the more dance-pop Xymox, also signed to Tess in 1997.
Joshua Gunn, a professor of communication studies at Louisiana University, described the U.S. type of dark wave music as
