Ghetto house, booty house or G-house is a genre of Chicago house which started being recognized as a distinct style from around 1992 onwards. It features minimal 808 and 909 drum machine-driven tracks and sometimes sexually explicit lyrics.
The template of classic Chicago house music (primarily, "It's Time for the Percolator" by Cajmere) was used with the addition of sexual lyrics. It has usually been made on minimal equipment with little or no effects. It usually features either a "4-to-the-floor" kick drum or beat-skipping kick drums such as those found in the subgenre "juke" (full sounding, but not too long or distorted) along with Roland 808 and 909 synthesized tom-tom sounds, minimal use of analogue synths, and short, slightly dirty sounding (both sonically and lyrically) vocals samples, often repeated in various ways. Also common are 808 and 909 clap sounds, and full "rapped" verses and choruses.
The 2000s saw a rise in Chicago juke, a faster variant of ghetto house which began forming in the late 1980s. Chicago juke songs are generally around 150-165 BPM with beat-skipping kick drums, pounding rapidly (and at times very sparsely) in syncopation with crackling snares, claps, and other sounds reminiscent of old drum machines. The production style is often markedly lo-fi, much like baile funk. Chicago Juke evolved to match the energy of footwork, a dance style born in the disparate ghettos, house parties and underground dance competitions of Chicago. RP Boo, a former footwork dancer, is generally credited with making the first songs that fall within the canon
Living hand in hand with juke music, "footwork" is one of the popular "hood" dance music styles in the world. Footwork is a controlled and complex moving of the feet at high speeds, a modern form of house dance footwork and breakdancing footwork. Producers in the Chicago juke and booty house genre include DJ Deeon, Dude 'n Nem, DJ Slugo, DJ Chip, DJ Nate, DJ Tha Pope, DJ Nehpets, DJ Rashad, and Spinn. Teklife is a footwork collective.[citation needed]
In December 2005, DJ Gant-Man became the first DJ/producer to have a Chicago Juke house remix for a major artist on a major label with his remix for Beyonce's "Check on It" featuring Slim Thug on Columbia/Sony Records and Gant-Man also helped develop Chicago juke sound. Missy Elliott was the first artist to showcase Chicago dance and music scene on BET's 106 & Park in 2005 with her song "Lose Control". She hired a female dancer choreographer from Chicago to do the choreography for the "Lose Control" music video. Elliott discovered Chicago juke watching television in Chicago on tour. She performed with Chicago dancers at some of her music events over the years and has helped bring Chicago juke into the mainstream.
Juke has been popular in European clubs, particularly in Paris, Brussels, and Spain for years. UK label Planet Mu's compilation Bangs and Works Volume 1 (2010) has brought the work of Chicago DJs to a wider audience, drawing some media attention. The Hyperdub label has been a supporter of juke and footwork, releasing much of DJ Rashad's material.
