Tropical house, also known as trop house, is a subgenre of deep house, with elements of dancehall and Balearic house. Artists of the genre are often featured at various summer festivals such as Tomorrowland. The genre was popularized by artists including Thomas Jack, Kygo, Matoma, Lost Frequencies, Seeb and Klingande.
The term "Tropical House" began as a joke by Australian producer Thomas Jack, but has since been gaining popularity among listeners. The term "trouse" should not be confused with tropical house, as "trouse" is a genre that instead combines the feeling of trance and the beats of progressive house, using electro synths.
In the mid and late 2000s, Bob Sinclar and Yves Larock created international hits which had many characteristics of tropical house. In 2012, Unicorn Kid had created tropical rave, a faster form of the genre which would become known as tropical house. However, it was not until 2013 with Klangkarussell's "Sun Don't Shine" and the emergence of producers such as Kygo and Robin Schulz that tropical house became a dance music trend. During 2014 and 2015, producers such as Lost Frequencies, Felix Jaehn, Alex Adair, Sam Feldt, Bakermat, Klingande and Faul & Wad Ad would join them with big tropical house hits. Tropical house arrived in 2015 in the globally mass market fully through Justin Bieber's 2015 album Purpose and its first two singles "What Do You Mean?" and "Sorry".[citation needed]
Tropical house is a subgenre of deep house, which is itself a subgenre of house music. Thus, it possesses typical house music characteristics, including synthesizer instrumentation, and a 4/4 kick drum pattern. Tropical house differentiates itself from deep house, which can often have a very dark sound, whereas tropical house can be described as having a more uplifting and relaxing sound. The tempo of tropical house songs is a little slower than deep house (110-115 bpm). Tropical house does not use the pumping compression effect of "big room" electro house. It usually includes tropical instruments such as steel drums, marimba, guitar, saxophone or even pan flute, and can sometimes use dembow rhythm patterns often attributed to genres such as dancehall and reggaeton.
