Wonky (also known as purple sound, aquacrunk, or lazer hip hop) is a subgenre of electronic music known primarily for its off-kilter or “unstable” beats, as well as its colorful blend of varied genres including hip hop, ‘80s electro-funk, 8-bit music, jazz fusion, glitch, and crunk. It initially emerged in 2008 from the UK's dubstep and grime scenes, exchanging their austere sound for a typically exuberant style featuring garish synthesizer tones, melodies, and effects. Artists associated with the style include Rustie, Joker, Hudson Mohawke, Zomby, and Flying Lotus.
Wonky has a diverse background, owing its sound to multiple influences and genres. According to the genre's description on the music website Rate Your Music,
In 2002, American producer Rodney Jerkins preceded wonky with the R&B song "What About Us", written for American singer-songwriter Brandy. In 1997, Brooklyn-based MC Sensational included the first wonky beat.[citation needed] In February 2004, American artist Jneiro Jarel released "Get Yuh Own" and "N.A.S.A" on Kindred Spirits/Label Who. Jneiro Jarel could be considered one of the pioneers of the wonky rhythm aesthetic. A few years later, wonky developed in various places around the world simultaneously. Starkey is one of the main proponents of the wonky sound. The American wonky sound has also been dubbed "street bass".
Glasgow in Scotland could be considered one of the birthplaces of the sound[citation needed] - with the Glasgow wonky sound also being dubbed "aquacrunk", a term originating from Glaswegian wonky musician Rustie. Glasgow club night Numbers (run by the Numbers record label), local record shop Rub-a-dub, labels like Wireblock, Stuff and Dress 2 Sweat are associated with the aquacrunk/wonky sound in Glasgow. The wonky/aquacrunk scene in Glasgow is also centred on the LuckyMe collective; Hudson Mohawke, Rustie and Ikonika come from this scene.[citation needed]
Since the release of Jagz The Smack, hype has built[citation needed] behind Rustie and Aquacrunk (the name came from Rustie’s passion for crunk and the aquatic electronics of Drexciya).[citation needed]
The term "wonky" has, since mid to late 2012, confusingly been associated with modern Brostep music. As this nu-brostep has none of the rhythmic "wonk" that defines the genre, this use of the word is being stamped out[by whom?] due to its confusing misappropriation.[citation needed]
The "wet and unstable" sound of wonky is often achieved by producing unquantized beats and mid-range basses using pitch bending, mid-range synths, LFOs on lowpassing and highpassing, phasing, and delaying.
Though wonky music is united by the tendency to use unstable mid-range synths, every wonky music scene has its own specific traits in sound. The American wonky "street bass" scene is influenced by broken beat and jazz music and the music itself has an organic feeling, while the Glasgow aquacrunk and Bristol purple sound scenes are influenced by the sound of crunk, chiptune, electro and instrumental grime/dubstep, respectively.[citation needed]
Aquacrunk is made of slowed down, low-slung beats, with electronic mutterings and morphing basslines. It is influenced as much by early Rephlex and Underground Resistance releases by crunk artists like Lil Jon or Young Buck.
Purple sound emerged in Bristol in late 2008 out of the splintering dubstep scene and took inspiration from wonky, which it is sometimes considered a part of. It incorporates synth funk from the 1980s and G-funk production from the ’90s into dubstep, while also introducing many aspects of grime and chiptune (several prominent purple sound artists cite video game music as a large influence). Purple sound usually includes synths as a main component and avoids the bass 'wobble' and 2-step common in dubstep. The majority of purple sound tracks are instrumental.[citation needed]
